In this video, we're
going to look at
some great additional
features for
doing data analysis
with Power Pivot.
These include calculated columns,
hierarchies, and the
distinct count option.
We're going to start by going
back into our Power Pivot window.
Coming to your
Power Pivot ribbon,
can you please click "Manage",
and if it's open in
your diagram view,
can you flip back to Data View.
We're going to start by
coming to our Orders table.
At the bottom, have a look
through the tabs until
you get to Orders, and we're
going to click on that.
This data has not been
imported using Power Query,
but there are still
simple modifications
we can make to it.
For example, if I select
the OrderDate column,
I can't change the formatting.
On the home ribbon,
you'll see there's
a format option and I can
switch that over to be just date.
But I need something
more than that.
I want to be able to see
the order year right
here in the table.
To do that, I'm going to
need a simple calculation,
and I can do that using
a calculated column,
much like I would do in Excel.
Coming to the end of the table,
you'll see an option
to add a column,
and I'm just going to click into
the first cell in that column,
and I'm going to create
a calculation like
I normally would.
I'm going to type equals,
and you'll see the equals
appears in your formula bar.
Now in Excel, the
formula to extract
the year from the date
is the year function,
and if I start typing YEAR,
you'll see it actually comes
up in the autocomplete,
and if I press Tab it
complete it for me.
It is important to note,
however, that this is
not an Excel function.
We do not have access to
the regular Excel
functions in Power Pivot.
Instead, we have access to
a whole new suite of
calculations called DAX,
or Data Analysis Expressions,
and we're going to
look at these a lot
more in later videos.
But the good thing is that you'll
find a lot of the DAX functions
are very similar or even
identical to the
Excel counterparts.
You can see the year function
is just asking for a date,
and I'm going to
select OrderDate,
and that looks very similar to
a structured reference
in the table.
The only difference is that it's
not just working
with a single row.
The DAX functions are going
to apply to entire columns.
When I press Enter,
it has now calculated
the order year for
every single row,
and all I need to do is
change the column heading,
and you can do this
by double-clicking
or right-click "Rename",
and I'm going to call this
Order Year and press Enter.
If there are columns
of data missing,
you can go and add them by
including calculated columns.
Now in the previous video,
we saw that Power Pivot
automatically added
a date hierarchy,
which is really useful.
What about if we want to
create our own hierarchies?
Well, we can do that too.
To do this, we're going to
come back to our Diagram View,
so on the home ribbon we're
selecting Diagram View,
and we want to add the hierarchy
to our customer table,
and if you have a look at
the top right-hand corner
you'll see an option to maximize.
We're going to click
on that so we can
see all the fields more easily,
and just next to that maximize
field is the Create
Hierarchy option,
and we're going to
click on that as well.
It's out of the hierarchy.
We need to give a sensible name.
I'm just going to call
this Geo and press Enter,
and all I need to do now is drag
the fields down
into the hierarchy.
I'm going to start with Country.
I'm going to click and
drag and basically drop
it on the name of hierarchies.
I just do that with
the first one,
and now I've got Country.
Next is State, and
I'm going to click
and drag but now be careful.
You want to try drop it
literally just blow Country.
If you go too low,
can you see that black line going
before where I cross the window?
That means it's
not going to work.
Just pull it up a little bit
so that the black line stops
about half a centimeter short
of the edge of the
window, and now release.
There's my State and
the same with city,
just drop that underneath state,
and I've created my hierarchy.
To minimize this window again,
you just click back on the
top right-hand corner,
and now we're going
to press Alt tab to
go back into our Excel workbook,
and would like to
create an analysis
to show the total
revenue by region.
I'm going to come to
Insert, PivotTable,
click "Okay", and now
I'm going to start
by coming to Orders,
and I'm going to add the subtotal
because the total
includes freight,
so I'm going to select subtotal,
and of course it's added it up,
and now coming up to customer,
you'll see my new hierarchy
is being added at the top,
and if I select it,
I can see that next to each
country is a little plus,
which will allow me to
expand or collapse.
If you come up to your
PivotTable Analyze ribbon.
In the Active Field group,
you will see there's an option
to expand all the fields.
If I click on that plus,
it actually expands
all the countries,
and if I click on the minus,
it collapses all of them,
and look those features
aren't very new,
but they are useful
with our hierarchies.
What is new is the
Drill Down option.
If you clicked on one of
the countries and you
select Drill Down,
it actually drills
down to show you
all the states for that country,
and now if I click
Drill Down again,
I'm seeing all the cities
within that state.
I can then either drill backup to
state or if I click the dropdown,
I get the option to drill all
the way back up to country.
Really handy feature to allow you
to drill down in
your data analysis.
Now taking this one step further,
I'd actually like to know
how many customers made a
purchase in each country.
Now if I grab CustomerID
and drag it and drop it into
the values quadrant
because it's numeric,
it's going to add it up, which
is obviously not correct.
I'm going to click the
dropdown next to CustomerID,
and I'm going to select
Value Field Settings.
Now the counter's
been there forever,
but the problem with the
count is it's going to
tell me how many
orders were placed,
and it's quite likely that
some customers placed
more than one order.
That's not going to tell me
how many customers I have.
What I want is a way of counting
how many unique customer IDs
there are or distinct
if you prefer.
If you scroll down in
your Value Field
Settings, in Power Pivot,
we have a brand new
calculation option
called Distinct Count,
and this will give us
exactly what we want.
I'm going to select Distinct
Count and say Okay,
and that tells me how
many unique instances of
the CustomerID it found
for each country.
One more bonus little feature.
Let's change this
up a little bit.
Let's work out the percentage
revenue for each region.
I'm going right-click
on my SubTotal,
and I'm going to come
to Show Values As and
choose Percentage
of Column Total.
That's telling me
that the US made
up over 58 percent of my revenue.
But let's say I'm the manager
for the UK and Europe,
so I only want to focus
on those regions.
I'm going to come to my Row
Labels, click the dropdown,
and I'm going to
unselect Australia,
Canada, and the US.
But when I click "Okay",
you'll see it has recalculated
my percentages
because by default,
the subtotals in PivotTables
only show the visible cells,
they do not include
the filtered values.
But here again,
Power Pivot gives us
something additional.
If you come to your
Design ribbon,
PivotTable tools design,
and come to your Subtotals,
we now have the option to
include filtered items in totals.
In normal pivots,
this is grayed out.
But when I select that,
I'm now seeing the
actual percentages
for each of my regions
and let's put a little s
next to my Grand Total
so that I can see that
the total here includes
filtered items.
I'm not saying all the values
that make up that total.
Probably in this particular case,
I come to Grand Totals
and just turn it off.
We've seen some great features
there for helping with
our data analysis,
we've created calculated columns,
hierarchies, used
the Distinct Count,
and even looked at
how we can include
filtered items in our subtotals.
But we're only just
getting started.
In the next video,
we're going to look
at some exciting
opportunities for
visualizing data using Power
Pivot, so keep watching.